hi chip
hi Josh how you doing
it's good to be with you good let me
introduce us I am Josh summers a
yoga teacher and meditation teacher in
Boston you are chip heart raft also a
yoga teacher and meditation teacher
based in Boston but with some noted
distinctions you are a founder and
director of the Arlington Center in
Arlington Massachusetts
you're an independent scholar on faculty
at Lesley University at the berry Center
for Buddhist studies in Barre
Massachusetts and also at Spirit Rock
Meditation Center in California and you
are a
translator and commentator of Patanjali
yoga Sutra which I have here which is a
seminal text on yoga philosophy and
practice practice
so to get going to get started chip a
lot of people right now are probably
familiar with what a yoga mat is what
downward dog is what maybe yoga bootcamp
is but not as many are likely familiar
with who Patanjali was or what the yoga
sutra was in fact most people when they
hear yoga Sutra might think it's
complete it was some other famous Sutra
that they've heard of so to get started
how might you describe or explain
what yoga yoga sutra was or who
patanjali was for the uninitiated oh
well it's a really good question
Patanjali I
don't know who he was and it's almost
impossible to say because the yoga sutra
is a work that describes the path to
awakening without really having any
characters unlike the Buddhist sutras
for example which were largely stories
about the Buddha and his life the people
that he spoke to and that he helped the
Yoga Sutras an austere work that
describes the path of liberation as it's
understood in the yogic tradition
we don't know therefore very much about
Patanjali although a vast aura of myth
surrounds him or her they don't even
know when the yoga sutra originated but
their many clues in it that point to an
early origin to some of its teachings
about yoga and meditation probably from
the milieu before and during the life of
the Buddha and also some evidence of
later
additions and modifications of it
bringing it into line with a very
different stream of Indian thought which
is the brahmanical tradition so right
away there's a differentiation between
the yoga sutra which is the it's
associated with what today is called
Hinduism but back then you'd think of as
you know perhaps 2,000 years ago or so
as a broad collection of
practices and understandings they're
really different than Buddhism that
included a lot of theology for example a
lot of devotional practices the Yoga
Sutras really though about what was
conceived of as early yoga which was
meditation and in that sense it reflects
and also
comments on the earlier and
groundbreaking meditation teachings of
the Buddha who lived about 2,500 years
ago mm-hmm okay so it's a you're
describing it sounds like a meditation
manual or a meditation text yes but most
most people today might think of yoga as
a system of postures and contortions and
breathing exercises and things like that
so how do these things add up or how do
they line up
well it's interesting they don't exactly
the way that the early meditative yoga
morphed into the modern yoga that we do
today what's sometimes called modern
postural yoga it's very physical and
dynamic is not entirely clear one
thing's for sure though the people who
originated the meditative yoga and their
predecessors
definitely did physical practices of
some kind in fact it's supposed that the
Buddha himself siddhartha gautama and
possibly also coppola the founder of the
song kiya philosophy and
Mahavira the the
purported founder of the Jains all were
warrior caste and probably had a lot of
physical training it's hard to imagine
that ancient peoples didn't do a lot of
physical things you can see evidence of
physical practices even what looks like
a yoga pose in seals surviving from the
Indus Valley
but the
idea of the early yoga was being a
spiritual warrior not through dynamic
practices but by shaping and cultivating
the mind and its ability to see things
more clearly
so both paths the liberating path of the
Buddha and that of Patanjali and the
Brahmanical yoga they're about awakening
they're about seeing things as they are
they're being becoming free of
affliction and the path the main path is
meditation right now the Yoga Sutras
thought of it as a work of philosophy
even when yoga teacher trainings have a
component on yoga philosophy for example
they always talk about the yoga Sutra
and in a sense it's really two works and
one because it does lay out some
philosophy and yet its main thread and
the word search word literally means
thread its main thread is how to sit on
a cushion and become still and train
your mind it's a little like a road map
because it offers some clear kind of
benchmarks or
landmarks that you can identify as
passing through on your way towards
clear vision and knowing and that seems
to be a central theme through Indian
philosophy in general would you and that
there's a sort of a metaphysics
component to the philosophy and then a
sort of a practice or prac this
component to bring about a realization
of the metaphysical underpinning you
know it's true the yoga sutra would be
one example of that
and so I guess within the Sutra itself
what is the word of define the the
underlining or underlying metaphysics
that are is being proposed in the
philosophy
yeah well just to back up a little bit
and give some background the kind of
spiritual tradition from which all of
this yogic inquiry seems to have
evolved or perhaps reacted to was a
brahmanical tradition where it was
really defined by what you do the word
karma literally means what you're doing
it means activity from the root cutter
to do its cognate with our word create
and the idea of karma to the early Vedic
people's for example and their spiritual
culture all involved prayers and spells
and sacrifices rituals of various kinds
and what was unique about the Yogi's is
they redefined Karma as
actions that occur at a psychological
level a physical level a linguistic
verbal a logical level and how those
have an effect on how we perceive and
relate to the world including the world
the inner world as well as the outer
world now it's there though that there's
a fork in the road because then there is
a metaphysical background to yoga into
the yoga Sutra but basically it's this
the yoga Sutra is a work of what's
called sung kiya song Keo is an early
view point it actually aimed for a kind
of scientific
assessment of what the world is like if
you look around what makes up the world
well according to song kia and its
earliest philosopher that we know about
this legendary yogi named Coppola
Coppola identified
different levels of reality 24 different
levels of reality
that together he called nature the word
property that that route again cutter
meaning to create and proud like our
poor or / means forward the idea is that
property or nature is just issuing forth
that reality is all these conditions and
processes that are unfolding but there's
also something else and that something
else is
awareness and awareness is not part of
nature its apart from it the word for
apartness in fact is a really important
word in the yoga Sutra now here's what
the yogi aims to do through meditation
the yogi aims to realize that this
awareness is already free it's not that
one becomes free by breaking out of her
escaping afflictions so in other words
freedom is not a jailbreak it's a
realization the nature of this awareness
which Patanjali and Sankhya called
Patricia Patricia in everyday language
that means person but here it means
something special it means awareness
that is not have any characteristics at
all in fact it's not visible you can't
find your parotia everything that you
think of as you like thoughts sensations
all kinds of sense experiences mental
experiences and emotions all of those
are nature or property and pushes
something else you could say it's your
real identity but it's completely free
of identity so that's the physics in a
nutshell right yeah yeah yeah you said
that nicely and it's it always strikes
me as a bit of an odd metaphysics
because
well for one it's a it's this dualistic
model it's a type of a dualistic model
where you have property being everything
that's manifest but including
consciousness itself yes right so my
that's my most important thing yeah
right I'll just this itself as part of
property and we can get into how we
might define
how consciousness operates or what it
functions as but to me it just as an
everyday person it it strikes me as
something that allows me to know things
so I know things are known through
consciousness but all of that the thing
that is known and the thing that's
knowing in a certain sense seems to be
wrapped up in this this on one side of
the ledger as property or as manifests
nature and on the other side is
something outside of this entirely which
is that's right I will probably apart
from it totally apart so where this
so you know in thinking about this and
in reading through your commentary of
the Sutra that you know it seems to me
like there could be too many many
reactions to that
type of metaphysics one might be that
kind of a skeptical view or skeptical
stance towards it like this just seems
odd that there is a kind of primordial
awareness that's
pervading the cosmic soup of the
universe and that somehow we have to
dissing disidentify with everything else
we'd normally take to be me or mine - it
is tin this true identity as the supreme
ultimate pure awareness
so there's a skeptical view that I think
many listeners might share but there's
also kind of a view that might
want to subscribe to it or almost have a
kind of compromised ire for confirmation
in this view because
it it validates that there's something
outside or otherworldly to the misery
that we might be experiencing right now
mmm right the baby
wave is it that there's an escape hatch
somehow that's right the idea of these
salvific
understandings is that there is the
possibility of freedom from affliction
and how they're defined can vary they
certainly do vary between the yoga
tradition and the Buddhist tradition but
they point to the same kind of
possibility I would say also that
this metaphysic conforms to a certain
extent to the progress of insight in
meditation because as meditation deepens
as tranquility and non reactivity and
fixity of concentration what I mean by
that is concentration staying right
there yeah hang on one second right
because you mentioned the progress of
insight and even though I discussed that
in a previous dialogue with camel
masters maybe just yeah pause and
contextualize that for folks mm-hmm so
the idea being that
somewhat predictable and
identifiable
stages of
increasing knowledge and vision about
the way that things come to be and by
things not just outside oneself but the
nature of one's own perception are a
part of the Buddhist tradition at least
the later Buddhist traditions and
also are alluded to in early works like
the Pali teachings and the yoga Sutra as
well but the fundamental
property of the relationship is one of
dis identification of seeing that a
thought a sensation and emotion which
ordinarily feel like me actually arise
and pass away in personally so let's get
back to that metaphysic where
consciousness as defined by Patanjali is
on the other side of the ledger here's
how he defines it this is a Csonka
definition consciousness is mainly
involved with three things the first is
what's called it's a sensing Manas and
what sensing is it's the way that all of
the sensory inputs are managed the way
attention moves to this and away from
that the way attention funnels towards a
small field or and law to a larger field
so of one important set of processes
involved in consciousness is just how
your mind focuses on things how it how
it processes and filters incoming sent
stuff the second is how it generates
mental structures and that idea Budi has
to do with imagination with memory with
planning the the the future with
conceptual and linguistic
structures and so forth now the third
process is the one that's really
important and that is self creation or I
making a hum Cara that set of processes
imparts a sense of self to experiences
that Patanjali saying are actually as
impersonal as the display that we're
talking on right now your computer
screen so what you think or I think of
what feels like my inner self is saying
is actually a representational display
just like a monitor on a computer or on
on a phone it's a impersonal device it's
conditioned if I pulled the plug the
screens going to go dark consciousness
is really no more than that the thing
that's aware is awareness and awareness
isn't you so it's already free and what
feels like affliction you're being in
the grip of pain being in the grip of
not wanting something or wanting
something that isn't here being in the
grip of change all of those are
illusions but they're really strong ones
so the metaphysic and the you know the
the kind of conceptual
framework of property and Pedrosa nature
and awareness conforms to a growing
experience that a meditator has I think
which he or she begins to experience
their own thoughts sensations and
feelings as impersonal the Buddha
pointed to that - it's a really
important benchmark of progress well
let's come to the comparison contrast
overlap with with early Buddhism in a
second if we can I just want to continue
to flesh out
some aspects of the Sutra so there's the
other metaphysic of duality between
materiality or property and pure
awareness
but there's a large component of
practice a sort of injunction around
practice in the yoga Sutra for what does
one need to do to come to this
liberating insight yeah if you could
just speak about that what is the the
general process look like for some time
well that's your right that's the thing
about the yoga Sutra it actually echoes
the teaching in the Bhagavad Gita where
Krishna tells Arjuna
that Yoga is the practice samkhya is the
philosophy and that the somke and yoga
together
are superior to they exceed the just the
liberation of possibility of the earlier
Vedic teachings now the yoga sutra has
both as I mentioned before it has a
pretty ample philosophical background to
it so it's often read as a work of
philosophy but I would take it to be
mainly a road map and the roadmap that
Patanjali lays out is an echo of the
buddhas in that it's an Eightfold Path
in fact in sanskrit the words Ashtanga
maha
reflect the language that the buddha
himself spoke a tango Mogga and Pali so
it means Eightfold Path but there's a
little difference because Patanjali is
Eightfold Path is structured differently
than the Buddhist it's a little bit like
nesting Russian dolls in that it starts
with a person let's say your
relationship to the beings and the
objects of the external world and those
relationships are
described with causal principles which
are called the Yama's or disciplines the
thing about the Yama's is for example
the first one says that you know if you
live in a non violent non harming way
other beings also you know put down
their defenses they let go of their
aggression toward you
and it's an interesting statement
because it isn't a commandment it
doesn't say thou shalt not harm or kill
it's not a
precept either doesn't say actual
undertake to refrain from harm for
example what it's laying out is a causal
statement just saying if you are
established in non-harming then
the world is different around you so
each of the five of these
describes a causal relationship between
the yogi on the one hand and the
external world of beings objects now the
next layer in the neon is and nee means
in word or within so the next layer in
is the Nima's and those principles
govern your personal sphere the personal
sphere of the yogi so they have things
like you know purification contentment
with the materials at hand in other
words you don't need to travel to the
Himalayas to awaken you actually will
have to awaken in your own skin your own
flesh your own consciousness wherever
you are so this is enough that's
santosha and there are three other
principles that are very important in
the Neo Mo's too but they govern your
internal sphere now what's at the centre
of your internal sphere your body so
that's the next layer that's the layer
of asana it's awesome to literally mean
sitting and it means how the body sits
in the world in relation to itself and
there the instruction is surprisingly
simple they're only three lines about
asana and they have nothing to do with
stretching standing on your head with
bending or twisting or anything dynamic
all they say basically is this
sit in a way that steady it's
comfortable let go of physical doing or
karma you will naturally arrive at a non
dual way of being and in that the usual
afflictions that happen from the
opposites from hot and cold from
pleasure and pain from I and thou will
dissipate so once that occurs what's at
the centre of the bodily experience the
next level prana right so this more so
so just to reiterate for a second there
is this movement for more gross
interaction with the world I'm like the
first first limb on how you're
interacting or behaving or causing
actions in the world to how you're
really into your internal experience yes
and then a more refined perception of
the internal experience yes and that is
a turning point because when the yogi
can fasten the tension onto the
aliveness of the body and particularly
its manifestation is breathing pranayama
literally means
elongating the prana or
aliveness life force processes of
breathing it doesn't mean that you're
actively doing it though later pranayama
that will evolve and how to yoga
involves all kinds of patterns that you
impose on breathing but Patanjali is
pranayama like the Buddha's involves
watching the breath and just by watching
it the breath changes just by watching
the body we come to recognize when it's
doing stuff because most bodily most
mental most perceptual actions or Karma
are unconscious we don't know we're
doing them we're just doing them so 99%
of karmic activity flies beneath the
radar and when it comes to bodily energy
focusing on it it becomes a compelling
object now for Patanjali that's the
turning point as you become focused on
that energy the external world the usual
role of the senses just to get good
stuff and keep you away from bad stuff
changes completely you withdraw into
that energy that's called pratyahara and
it means that now attention could really
become focused and the last three
elements of the yogic path are really
different sides of the same process they
involve the way the mind holds the
object the way the mind becomes
completely absorbed in it and the way
the object reveals its nature just it
without elaboration those are Dharan
agenda Samadhi right
so yeah you know I think what you're
describing
might
overlap to some degree not maybe not
with the same kind of precision but
might overlap with like a kind of
conventional view that people have about
meditation that you sit down you focus
on something and as the senses to use
Patanjali language would draw from
contact with sounds other images other
sensations other smells and things
there's a withdrawal and a more a
deepening of absorption in whatever
object perhaps the breath that the PERT
that the Yogi's focused on so there's
like there's a there's a dis
diminishing of thought
certainly you you have a diminishing of
irritable energies or irritable mind
States and there's a more focused
refined kind of embeddedness with the
object of observation
that's right right yeah and we can all
relate to it because all of these are
simply deeper developments of everyday
things for example we all relate to the
world of objects and beings and we've
all had the experience of being
relatively
economist in the face of something you
know we've also experienced not being a
quantum in the face of it in the same
way we've all focused on something and
tuned out other things so somebody could
come into the room and call your name
and you might not notice it so absorbed
are you in the task at hand so yoga is
just a furthering of that and it
involves training to a higher degree the
very things that are lying you know in
wait in all of us so these are inherent
capacities that the yogi is developing
also the way the way Patanjali describes
the body and the breath is
identical to the Buddha's teaching in
that particularly pranayama he uses the
same kinds of words yeah yeah I will
concede that I think there is a lot of
overlap
you know in one way of looking at that
there your focus in the breath you're
settling down
but patanjali x' model use a word or you
translated a word to mean coalescence
coalescence where as it sounds to me
like if I remember these an amplifier
reading where like all the different
inputs of sound are kind of fluctuating
while listening to music they're going
up and down and so this could be
synonymous or analogous to
sensory experiences of images thoughts
memories all these things are kind of
fluctuating but as the meditator moves
into this experience of stillness it's
like all the little different readouts
sort of settle down and level out to
zero and at that point you use this word
if I'm correct coalescence and
consciousness at that point
functions as a mirror to reflect this
witnessing pure awareness back to itself
which is something like that yeah let me
let me just elaborate on that a bit
because there's a context to all of this
Josh when I was translating the yoga
Sutra and really exploring it I was also
involved in a pretty deep investigation
of the Buddhist teachings and the
teachings that are attributed to the
Buddha there's actually a difference
because not all teachings attributed to
the Buddha actually originated with him
many of them originated with later
generations and that's quite true
actually of the formal meditation
teachings that were most fond of today
and really think of as the Buddhist main
teachings and just look at Buddha quotes
on Facebook
yeah so I never come across one that I
recognize to be honest with you right I
really don't but back to
this
the context of writing the yoga Sutra
book I was a little shy at the time
about making what now in retrospect are
obvious and certain connections between
the very language that the Buddha and
his near followers evolved to describe
meditation and the language Patanjali
used and the word that you've zeroed in
on that word that I translated it as
coalescence that's right at the center
of this because actually the word
samapatti is a technical word in
Buddhism that refers specifically to the
four form jhanas the four stages of
Samadhi okay so
nice talking to technical translation
for a second so four stages of Samadhi
or jhana are
deepening stages of
concentration or steadiness stillness
these these words get used kind of
interchangeably I pass it back to you
which words do you like the most for
these stages
well you know each of the four stages of
increasing absorption have different
characteristics so it's kind of hard to
pin them down with one single word but I
think that the word that's often used
I'll be it with its problematic aspect
is concentration just because your mind
is here and it's not there it's really
with something absorption also is it's a
word that sometimes used but all of
these hover around the growing sense in
the yogi that the mind is really steady
steady in a non ordinary way so it's
kind of hard to relate it to everyday
life the mind is completely with an
object or field and when that happens
there's certain ways that you know it
now here's the road map part of it when
this occurs there are clear phenomena
that are identifiable they're going to
be different from person to person but
they will happen for example you know as
concentration deepens to this first
stage that is called the first jhana
or dianna in the sanskrit there is going
to be the arising of a kind of an energy
and uplifting feeling it's going to be
accompanied by that there's also going
to be a sense of of pleasure and
you know a deep kind of bodily
contentment again these can manifest and
different ways and only certain kinds of
weak and relatively transparent
momentary thought forms can arise you're
really concentrated it's non ordinary so
you kind of know it when you see it and
each subsequent stage where
concentration deepens has this kind of
benchmark so it's like a road map where
you go up there's that you know exit
there's that mountain there's that lake
time to you know I'm going in the right
direction okay well since it's coming up
some it's probably a good time to say
Glee into maybe comparing to the
Buddhist map because you mentioned it a
few times
my sort of armchair view of the
differences between these systems is
that while they both might use and
utilize meditation as a technology or
kind of technology for deepening one's
perception of reality or Deeping one's
experience of things to come to a new
kind of understanding
the Patanjali model moves towards deeper
and deeper states of absorption
which lead to a kind of a transcendent
knowledge in it but in that process of
going deep into the absorption
you're not really the person isn't
really experiencing normal events
they're not experiencing sounds or
images or thoughts or anything like that
all those things all sort of get
displaced out of consciousness and
there's just this deepening absorption
whereas from a Buddhist perspective it
is it's I think it's more conventionally
conveyed you do develop a steadiness of
presence but that steadiness of presence
is open and available to whatever
happens to be arising in any of the
sense doors or any any any ways of
knowing your experience in the world so
there's this sort of they use this this
stability of presence to go into two
different directions it seems
so how do you how do you how do you
square I have to confess that you have
zeroed in on what I now regard as a kind
of defect in my book because I didn't
really go far enough
in
unpacking how Patanjali Spath is in fact
a path of insight it's not just a path
of
concentration or jhana and one of the
reasons why I think I
didn't unpack that enough is because
it's not that recognized in the
tradition and I felt I was really going
against the current there but in fact a
close reading of the yoga Sutra it
it shows that it's
very similar to the Buddhist
understanding which is that absorption
States or jonatha are of value
only to the extent that they bring one
to the threshold of
insight into
reality and reality is available the
yogi doesn't awaken in the fourth jhana
the Patanjali doesn't stop there what he
actually then describes is the nature of
arising and passing away and the whole
last part of both the third and the
fourth chapters are
unprecedented ly detailed
descriptions what it's like experience
momentary coming and going of reality
yeah yeah I talked about I just want to
get him get into it for a second because
people may unfamiliar may not be totally
up on this language like what is a
rising past anyway mean but again just
to describe the whole process as I'm
hearing from you the yogi goes into a
deeper state of absorption gets into
some of these more refined states of
concentration but then coming out of it
is what you're saying you're the the
yogi might have a new
perception on the ordinary which yes
which might be as I've described as the
rising passing way which is kind of a
very granular pixilated
perception of things
yes in fact Patanjali uses a striking
image he calls this dharma mega Samadhi
here interestingly is a borrow from the
abba dharma tradition of Buddhism now
epidermis is a
scholastic development Buddhism in which
later Buddhist theorists identified all
these kinds of granular components of
reality and they had certain words that
they coined and Patanjali uses them
that's one of the ways we know when
Patanjali is yoga Sutra is actually
finalized it was after the Abba Dharma
cuz the other dharmically only came
first but here's that here's the
punchline that
the Dharma's as its described in dharma
mega Samadhi are momentary the kind of
the briefest
most instantaneous bits if you will or
pixels of information that are involved
in any experience of thinking of emotion
of bodily experience in other words
everything and mega the word mega means
a cloud or a rain shower if you've ever
wandered through fog and felt the skin
of your face encountering one tiny
droplet after another or just a light
rain it's as if you're meeting thousands
and thousands of very brief momentary
inputs one after another no to arrive at
exactly the same time so there's a sense
of sequences of a rapidly rising and
falling nature to experience now that's
not how experience seems like right now
that's not how it seems reality seems
seamless it seems continuous it doesn't
seem to be pixelated but when the mind
is concentrated enough when body and
mind and they're doing they're reacting
their whole set of
reactions and responses to the world
just are quieted for a moment then this
can be seen a metaphor for this
different metaphors of the vessel of
muddy water if you put it down and leave
it alone you don't jar it then all the
little particles that make the water
seem cloudy all expend their energy and
they settle to the Bob so now the water
is clear but here's the thing the water
was clear all along
liquid water is clear it's not the water
itself that ever is cloudy in the same
way awareness is always clear and what
looks like the cloudiness of the mind
and of identification fall away before
one's eyes so it's a different world one
seeing even though it's exactly the same
it's just what's in front of you it's
just what's inside you but it's seen in
a different way so you do it you really
do see and I think you use this phrase
earlier with me in a previous talk you
see the Patanjali and the Buddha being
kind of fraternal twins separated at
birth oh I actually I put it a little
differently but but yeah it's right what
I'd say is that Yoga and Buddhism the
paths of
liberated
yoga
and
you know that that kind of spawned both
what's Buddhism today oh it's yurga
today those traditions are identical
twins that were separated birth and they
were raised in different cultures in a
way you know the yoga tradition was
raised in the brahmanical culture and it
becomes increasingly theistic it starts
to have a strong component of devotion
of ritual because the tradition comes
from that and so naturally it acquires
it interestingly enough Buddhism also is
strongly influenced by Brahmanism and
Broughton but as it becomes more
ritualistic too if you look around at
the different traditions of Buddhism
today you find that some of them are
intensely ritualistic they have beliefs
they have gods demons and all the kinds
of things that the Buddha himself seems
to have issued you know in his in his
yoga but back to those two you know yoga
and bosom yeah they come from the same
milia and they have the same DNA when
you look at the meditation teachings and
you also look at the result you look at
the end goal the very first important
line of the yoga Sutra lays it all out
Josh it says the Yoga is that niro dah'
the cessation of
mental turning you could say mental
patterning turning into this turning
into that that that comprises
consciousness and that word that he uses
nirodha it's the same word the Buddha
used they used the same word because
it's synonymous with the idea of
cessation or extinguishing Nibbana or
Nirvana everybody's heard that word
Nirvana you know and may think that it
refers to some state but it's the
subtraction of all states with which one
can be identified it's Nibbana
extinguishing it's like you're taking a
flame and not blowing it out but just
damping it depriving it of its fuel its
connection to fuel and
Patanjali is using the same idea they
well they're using the same words and I
still it doesn't sit with me still that
they're that they're pointing to the
same understanding or the same
realization or the same sort of Liberty
of experience
well certainly not as its described a
little later in both traditions but just
to plate your attention toward the last
lines of the yoga sutras I mentioned
before it has four chapters and in the
last few lines of the fourth chapter
Patanjali describes coming to the
precipice of this nirodha now nirodha or
cessation it means that consciousness is
coming to a stop and he says that right
at the beginning that first important
line he says yoga is bringing
consciousness to a stop and then in the
next line at the beginning he says then
pure awareness just seeing witnessing
sits in its own nature which means
there's no consciousness and at the end
of the yoga Sutra the same thing happens
so actually the way Patanjali describes
it is an even more detailed description
of what has come to be known in the
Buddhist tradition as cessation it is
the cessation momentary right of
consciousness so cessation and you know
I would add maybe that's an
interpretation of the term nirodha or
cessation in common Tyrael I think you'd
agree commentarial teachings on early
Buddhist teaching but in early in the
era in the early Buddhist sutras
which are about three four hundred years
prior to the commentaries you get a
sense that maybe yeah it depends but you
get a sense that cessation simply means
the cessation of a way of relating to
experience that causes dukkha or
suffering or agitation so it's not this
kind of blip out of consciousness per se
it's just the cessation of
suffering or an agitation
I'm not sure I agree with that in fact
I'm pretty sure I don't but I do think
that the buddha's hearers those who were
entrusted with conserving and
transmitting his teachings you know the
people who remembered it and when he
died they all got together and recited
what they thought they heard him say
clearly didn't understand everything
that he said so there are all kinds of
contradictory ways of describing things
and
sometimes a teaching will survive in a
tradition that seems to point to
something more elemental than say
another set of teachings about it there
are many instances of that and I think
that around in this case you have
some surviving remnants or para copays
from you know in the Pali Canon where
the it seems to be the Buddha talking
about what I'm talking about but they're
relatively few and far between between
there in archaic language though so you
can tell that they're in an early
linguistic layer that they arose at the
time of the butter or close to it you
know there's no one set of teachings
though that's reliably old or you know
new right well you know um this complex
it is complex and I think the really the
reason I'm I care about any of this is
that as I'm yeah we're both we both
practice meditation we both try to teach
it
and
what I have experienced in trying to
share some of this teaching is that
people's views of we're out about the
the practice that they're doing and
where the the assumptions they make
about what's supposed to happen or where
they're supposed to go with it operate
within their practice
oftentimes in a way that might hinder
their ability to actually practice in a
way that unfolds in a way that develops
wisdom or develops greater compassion or
something like that and so I often I've
been in the yoga scene for a long time
like you and I often hear people who
quote the suit yoga Sutra and kind of
have this view that they need to steal
their thoughts they need to calm their
ribs or they're calm they're the
fluctuations of their consciousness so
they can come into this more pristine
state of knowing that creates a a lot of
frustration in their practice where
their constant every every time they
have a thought that's a validation that
they're that they're failing at their
practice but it also can kind of develop
a an
attitude of dismissiveness an attitude
of detachment or kind of what's called a
spiritual bypass where they're trying to
go around there things are not really
looking at things if it's all just
matter and i mean ii meant to dis
identify with it then i just have to get
away from it or to go back to my breath
and get away from that experience and so
there's a way that i feel like
that kind of metaphysics actually can
hinder a deeper exploration of one's
internal life
yeah you're pointing to a real problem
you know and this is a human problem
it's not just limited to you know this
particular tradition or set of teachings
and it has to do with the fact that
as teachings they have to
occur in the realm of language and
immediately you know you've run into
trouble you know when I teach I start
out most of my teachings by presenting a
wordless image to people don't tell
anybody but it's a picture of a fossil
now you can't tell it's a fossil at
first it looks like a flower it has five
perfectly shaped petals and you can see
a lot of detail in it so I asked people
say what is this and invariably the
first voice says it's a flower well it
couldn't be farther from a flower and
yet it holds a great deal of information
about the flower it is about the flower
in two senses of the word you know it
relates to the flower and it also
surrounds the space that a living thing
called the flower one's occupy so that
gets a little bit at the difference
between what we think Patanjali is
saying about yoga and what actually
happens you're pointing though at a real
problem which is that it is possible to
inflate to exaggerate one's own
attainment to
arrive at understanding understandings
about this that our conceptual but
aren't yogic and
that's why it's it can be difficult to
use the work like that you know go Sutra
as a road map it's actually in a way it
it's kind of a it's full of absolutes
you know just starting with the Yama's
and right down to the end it's full of
absolutes the Patanjali doesn't talk
about how to get to the point where
you're firmly established in non-harming
for example that first Yama he never
tells you how to get to that point he
just says if you're fully established in
it then other beings can set down their
aggression so there isn't a lot of kind
of process that's being conveyed in the
yoga suture about how to get from here
to there in fact I'd even say the
Eightfold Path it's not really a ladder
with a set of rungs it's almost always
taught that way but I think it's a big
mistake it's really more like those
Russian dolls I was speaking of they're
kind of nested teachings and each
teaching relates to a different level or
layer of relationship ending with what's
internal what's inside but yeah you're
absolutely right about a kind of
goal-oriented spiritual practice you
know or you know that's one that's one
potential problem I think with the model
the other one is more of a moral one
where if if
liberation is predicated on a
transcendent
realization or an otherworldly
understanding or under worldly
attainment of some sort then that can
also
denigrate your whole relationship or
downgrade your whole relationship we're
careful why would you bother caring and
for anybody else or anything else if the
world has just meant there to be escape
from ha so this really gets at a
common understanding or I would say
misunderstanding about the yoga
tradition in fact there is a robust
tradition within yoga scholarship that
holds that the end state of yoga is one
of isolation from one's fellow human
beings in other words the yogi has
entered into this apartment that is a
state now this is a big misunderstanding
because the apartness that Patanjali is
talking about is the apartness of
awareness from nature from all the stuff
we think of as us it's actually
not us it's just impersonal and arising
and passing away so there's this sense
of space and freedom that's there but
that apartness is misconstrued as the
yogi has succeeded in isolating himself
or herself there in a kind of mental
cave of
utter you know a safety and security
because they're cut off from others and
that couldn't be further from the truth
in fact this is why Patanjali lays out
that yoga Sutra this Eightfold Path that
starts off with one's relationship to
one's fellow human beings and animals to
possessions and so forth the realm of
yoga most definitely includes social
life it includes our relationship to
others it starts out with the highest
causal principles of morality
interestingly though it doesn't align
them to anything that's an article of
faith you don't have to have any kind of
faith to refrain from harming other
beings
you know you do it because it's it's
skillful its mmm-hmm you know also the
thing about insight and its relationship
to morality is that in this case when
the yogi understands that all that is
experienced including the if elections
that cause us to harm other beings or
harm ourselves when one sees that one is
not that
then the compassion that is just
elemental and
you know primary to that insight it's
just there one isn't cultivating it it's
just simply there because what's true
for oneself is true for others and
that's immediately known now that isn't
true if you read it in a book that isn't
true if you
you know just hear an elder from a
spiritual tradition and you accept it as
an article of faith
but it is true when you see the nature
of your own thoughts because the first
person for whom you have compassion for
you have understanding is this complex
of reactions that you think of as you
you're seeing your experience you know
this is what you see it's the first
person we have compassion for usually
it's
down the road
advanced advanced practice
it's the first in fact in the Dharma
Magus Samadhi the experiences and this
is very similar to for example how the
progress of insight to which we referred
earlier has been described it's that one
momentary bit after another is appearing
but the afflictive spin of it falls away
and this is what enables the velocity
the rapidity with which phenomena arise
and pass away it said that the Buddha
inner praised this and and prioritized
it in his teaching and the Dhammapada it
says it's better to live just one day
seeing arising passing away then to live
a hundred years without right right you
know
well this has been very interesting I
would to close I was wondering if you
might have any for anyone that's trying
to meditate out there that's listening
is maybe got the headspace app going on
their iPhone or they got a few guided
meditations from somebody but anyone
that's trying to develop a meditative
practice would you do you have any sort
of takeaway key tips or ideas of how
they might approach practice that you
see 10 people tend to get the trouble
around where they get to create problems
for themselves in the meditation like
from Patanjali or from Buddha from your
own experience what might be of service
in that
well I think that you zeroed in on one
of the most important issues which is
how one relates to the fact that the
mind is not in jhana it's not in
absorption it isn't pure and continuous
and free of thoughts and it can't expect
it to be and yet that may be the
expectation that comes from reading or
work like you know Buddhist teachings
say or or the yoga Sutra where pristine
states of mind are described in fact the
Buddhist teachings on mindfulness and
Patanjali is teaching on seeing the way
things come and go are quite clear that
what the Yogi's watching is how things
are rise take the teachings on
mindfulness
your mindfulness of the heart mind
chitta and the various states that come
and go you know when they're there you
know when they're not there there's
nothing about eradicating them uprooting
them getting rid of them your knowing
when they're there knowing when they're
not there so the thing that I always
tell meditators first of all myself you
know when I'm meditating is to recognize
this fact as soon as it's noticed that a
thought is arise there's a kind of it's
a wonderful thing that's not usually
what happens when we see a thought has
arisen and then that that triggers more
thoughts like a little spark that starts
as a fire going there's a little
confirmation of thoughts about how your
mind is distracted how maybe other
people are able to quiet their mind but
you can't and so forth well no no that's
true actually noticing that thinking has
happened is it decisive kind of fork in
the road and when we come to it we can
go down that road of seeing that as
thinking recognizing it as thinking
that's true of just about anything it's
true in daily life - I don't know if you
know this about me but I like baseball
I'd love to go to Fenway Park you know
see the Red Sox play and I noticed that
sometimes I had superstitious it's about
baseball as many athletes do for
instance when I go to the game I should
wear that shirt that they won when I was
wearing last time last game I would I
began to notice every time I had a Sun
watch thought all unwashed yeah yeah if
you if you wash it you wash out the good
stuff
fans like players are suspicious of um
you know of chance they tend to be
superstitious in fact I think of a Red
Sox player Wade Boggs who always had
chicken before every game and a reporter
one's the best and he said why do you
eat chicken before every baseball game
he said there are hits in chicken
okay so anyway I noticed every time I
had a little itty-bitty teeny-weenie
superstitious thought just noticing it
noticing the undertow the pole it
happened on my heart my body my mind the
way it inclined me to do this and not do
that to put this shirt on or take that
shirt off just noticing that freed me
completely of it it's not that it no
longer arises though so that gets back
to this idea just because a thought
arises this doesn't mean that it's your
master when you recognize it that's the
beginning of freedom seeing things come
and go so thinking and meditation is an
opportunity for freedom
absolutely because being mindful of
thought being mindful of emotions
especially the things with which were
most identified if you look at the
teachings on mindfulness there are four
domains that we're really identified
with or identified with sensations in
the body that's me there's no ifs ands
or buts about it that's me we're
identified with the feeling qualities
that accompany them such as if a
pleasant feeling or unpleasant feeling
it doesn't feel like Pleasant unpleasant
it feels like I like that I don't like
it we're identified with what arises is
heart in mind right our emotions terse
things the way we Contractor on things
or want them to go away and we're
identified with mental states if your
mental states of dharmas aren't you then
what are you okay so all of these are
just opportunities to see up that went
away so I guess that's not the real me
the unchanging me
approach the booty it's just again and
again by the way you know you so if it's
going away then it can't really be an
enduring you know or persisting self
right right but then but then the you've
the way you've just formulated you
there's the underlying assumption that
there is an enduring unchanging me
somewhere within the middle of that
presentation
what you see seems to be what is the
nice you know we're supposed to be
wrapping up but here we go
well actually that is I was going to say
that's a nice way to wrap up because
you've put your finger on a real
difference between the the Buddhist
understanding and the yogic metaphysic
in in yoga and sunk you know it's held
that there is this enduring awareness
but it isn't you everything we think of
as you thoughts feelings sensations so
all of that are not it in fact it's not
even a thing so in a sense it's not even
dualism because that dualistic there
have to be two things right an apple and
an orange it's not that pure pure
awareness is no thing it has no
existence it doesn't exist or stand out
anywhere in space or time it wasn't
created it doesn't go away so it's not
really there but it's still as you
pointed out before a dualistic
metaphysic and the Buddha at least as
he's remembered you know in the
traditions was very very careful to
never ever claimed that posit some
locus of awareness that was the language
of the Vedas you know and of the
spirituality of the time and he and and
of the growing up Amish otic movement
and he stepped away from it he
deliberately you know language din a way
to avoid that his teaching is more
subtractive I would say an additive it's
more negative than positive in many ways
so that's it that's kind of the fork in
the road that's that's where the twins
were pried apart when you come to a fork
taking a good
look kiss it's been great talking to I
really want to thank you for your time
and thank you for everything you've
you've offered here thanks very much
Josh it's great to talk to you and to
everybody it's listening and watching
right take care okay